Next, we're going to talk about
breadth-first search which
is a completely different way to process
all the vertices connected to a given vertex.
It'll get the job done but
it has a totally different properties that
are useful in different ways for
different applications.
To understand breadth-first
search we'll start right out with a demo.
So breadth-first is not a recursive
algorithm, it uses a queue
as a axillary data structure And
it's also quite simple to explain.
So what we're going to do is
we're going to put the source
vertex on a queue and then repeat
the following until the queue is empty.
Remove the next vertex
from the queue in order.
Then add to the queue all unmarked
vertices that are adjacent to v and
mark them and just keep doing
that until the queue is empty.
Let's see how that works on our example.
This is a smaller example,
just a six vertex
graph with eight edges,
so I add 0 to the queue.
So we just take 0 and put it on the queue,
that's where we start.
And now we're going to repeat until
queue is empty remove a vertex,
add all unmarked vertex adjacent and
mark them.
So we dequeue 0 and
then in order to process 0 we need to
check all of the adjacent vertices,
so in this case that's 2, 1, and 5.
And again the order depends on
how the bag was constructed for
vertices adjacent to zero.
So we check 2 and that is not marked,
so we have to add it to the queue.
And then we check 1, that's not marked so
we add it to the queue.
And then we check 5, and that's not
marked so we add it to the queue So
we finished processing, 0,0 is done.
So now remove the next
vertex from the queue.
In this case it's 2, we're going to
take 2 off the queue and process it by
adding to the queue all the unmarked
vertices that are adjacent.
So to process 2, we have to check 0, 1,
3, and 4, we check 0 that's already
marked so we don't do anything.
We check 1, that's also already marked so,
we don't do anything in
fact it's on the queue.
We check 3 and that one is unmarked so,
we mark it and add it to the queue and
then we check 4 that one's unmarked,
so we mark it and add it to the queue.
So by the way, I didn't mention, but
we're also keeping track of 2
auxiliary data structures for this.
One is the edgeTo array,
which is the same as before,
what edge did we use to get to this?
So 4, and we got to 4 from 2 and
2 we got to 2 from 0,
so again that's going to be a tree that
gives us a path back to the source.
And instead of marked, we also keep
a more detailed information which is
the length of the path because we
do it because it's easy to do it.
Okay, so four, we check four and add it
to the queue and now we're done with two.
So now we have 1, 5, 3, and 4 are all in
the queue and we're going to process them.
And since we've marked everything,
all we're going to be doing now is
checking vertices that are marked, so
for 1 we check 0 and that's marked.
Then we check 2 and that's marked,
so then we're done with 1.
Next thing off the queue is 5 and
we check 3 and
that's marked and we check 0 and that's
marked so we're done with 5 and then 3.
We gotta check 5 and
then 4 and then two and they're all
marked and now we're done with three.
And then finally the last one, always
the last one, everybody else is marked, so
connected.
Check three, check two,
it's marked and we're done.
So what this process [COUGH]
the result of this computation,
again, Is a tree rooted at the source,
we can follow back
through the tree to get paths
from each node to the source.
And not only that,
we can get the distance,
the number of edges on the path
from each node to the source.
So that's a demo of breadth-first search,
and
next we'll take a look at
properties of this algorithm.
All right, so now we have considered
two different methods for
processing all vertices in the graph.
And actually they are quite closely
related even though the computations
are quite different.
Essentially depth-first
search uses recursion so
it corresponds to putting
unvisited vertices on a stack.
Breadth-first search explicitly we put
the unvisited vertices on the queue.
And actually, breadth-first
search solves another problem
that often we want to solve
called the shortest path problem.
Actually, the path that you get back from
breadth-first search is the path from
the source to the given vertex that
uses the fewest number of edges.
And we'll look at that in just a minute
and the idea is that the Breath-first
search examines the vertices in the graph
in increasing distance from the source.
So let's take a look at that, so
breadth-first search
computes shortest path.
That is it builds the data structure
that we can answer shortest path
queries from the source with.
From s to all other vertices in
the graph in time proportional to E + V,
the number of edges plus the number of vertices
and so let's look at why that's the case.
So first thing is, how do we know
that it computes shortest path?
Well the intuition is, and
you can fill in the details,
the queue always contains some vertices of
distance k from the source, followed by
some vertices of distance k plus one.
So they're on a queue, we're processing
them in first-in-first-out order.
So say we're at a state when all of
these vertices are on the queue.
We're going to have processed
vertex 0 as soon as we get this one
we'll delete vertex 0 from the queue and
then when we're putting these adjacent ones on.
We're adding the ones of distance
two but we're not going to
process any of those until we're done
with the ones of distance 1 and so forth.
So it's not hard to show that always,
you have either one of the two
distances from the source on the queue.
And that means the first
time we get to a vertex,
that's the shortest path to that vertex.
And, again, the running time, we only
visit vertices once because we mark them.
So, it's time proportional
to the number of vertices
plus the number of edges in the graph.
So, that's breadth-first
search properties and
then here's the implementation,
which is simply code for
the basic method that we
outlined in pseudocode.
So our private instance
variables are marked, or
in the demo we used distTo, but
just for simplicity let's use marked.
edgeTo then is how we get to
the first vertex and then the source.
And so I have a constructor that builds
those arrays the same way as before and
then calls BFS.
So BFS builds a queue,
that's what it's going to use, it
enqueues the source and marks the source.
And then this is just in code what we
said in words before, while the queue is
not empty, we pull off the next
vertex from the queue, call it v.
For everybody adjacent to v,
we go ahead and check.
If it's marked, we ignore it and
move to the next If it's not marked,
then we put it on the queue,
mark it, and remember the edge.
And again, this is an example
of the power of abstraction and
utility of our design pattern.
All we're doing in terms of graph
data type is being a client to go
through all the adjacent vertices.
But it allows us to implement this
completely different algorithm
in really an accessible way.
So that's the implementation of breadth-
first search and then the client for
getting the paths back
is the same as for
depth-first search, so
here's an old application of
breadth-first search.
And in computer networks it's very
important when you're communicating
from one place to another you want to
get there in the fewest number of hops.
This is the ARPANET the predecessor
to the internet as of
July 1977 when things were slow and
computers were small and
slow, it's important to do these
things in a small number of hops.
And with breadth-first search,
you could take this graph and
figure out the shortest way to
get from one place to another.
That's a typical application
of breadth-first search.
Here's another one, so-called Kevin Bacon
numbers, and nowadays actually
you can type Bacon and an actor's name and
get the answer to this.
So there's,
if you're not familiar with it, you can
become familiar with it by Kevin Bacon
numbers, the idea is you have a graph
where the vertices are actors.
And the edge,
you think of an edge connecting two
actors, if they were in a movie together.
And so,
what you want to find is given an actor,
[COUGH]
what's the shortest way to get to
Kevin Bacon connected by,
so, we have edges for
actors and edges for movies and a
connection if the actor is in the movie.
So Buzz Mauro and Tatiana Ramirez
were in Sweet Dreams together and
these two actors were in this
movie together and so forth.
And you get away to
Kevin Bacon from any actor and
this is another pop culture application.
This is the so-called six degrees,
which you can get to anyone with six steps
in this way, so that's all
implementation of breadth-first search.
On the Kevin Bacon graph,
where we include one vertex for
each performer, one vertex for each movie.
Connect the movie to all performers that
appear in the movie, and the shortest
path from Kevin Bacon to every actor
if you follow back through that path.
You get the proof of the got
a Kevin Bacon number for
each actor and we have implementation
of that on the book site.
So that's another example, and actually
there's a maybe even older service,
at least similar age example
that mathematicians are fond of.
And that's called
the so-called Erdos number.
So, in this one it's mathematicians,
the nodes are mathematicians and
there's an edge if the two mathematicians
have co-authored a paper and
Paul was a very productive
Hungarian mathematician.
Who travelled the world co-authoring
papers with people all over the world.
A very interesting and
prolific character who actually did
quite a bit of research on properties of
and maybe even more so than Kevin Bacon.
The idea that he was so
prolific that pretty much every
mathematician has a pretty
low Erdos number.
So that's our second example of
a graph processing algorithm,
breadth-first search.